=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

finddisowned - find files that are disowned by package manager

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<finddisowned> [I<OPTION>]...

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<finddisowned> lists the files that are disowned by package manager.

In particular, finddisowned compares the package database with contents of the
directories described in F</etc/finddisowned.whitelist>.

B<finddisowned> does not compare the package database with the entire file
system, but only with files from directories described in
F</etc/finddisowned.whitelist> becase the entire file system contains
directories such as F</home>, F</mnt> and even dynamic directories like
F</proc>, F</dev>, etc, the contents of which are definitely not taken into
account (and should not be) by package manager.

Feel free to adjust the whitelist conform your needs.

=head1 OPTIONS

Mandatory arguments to long options are mandatory for short options too.

=over 8

=item B<-w>, B<--whitelist> I<FILE>

Specify alternate whitelist file.

=item B<-r>, B<--root> I<PATH>

Specify alternate root directory.

=item B<-v>, B<--version>

Print version and exit.

=item B<-h>, B<--help>

Print help and exit.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 8

=item F</var/lib/pkg/db>

System package database.

=item F</etc/finddisowned.whitelist>

Contains a list of directories, the contents of which will be compared with
package database.

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2021 Alexandr Savca <https://github.com/zeppe-lin>.

License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<finddeps(1)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/pkgmaint/finddeps.1.pod>,
L<finddisappeared(1)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/pkgmaint/finddisappeared.1.pod>,
L<findredundantdeps(1)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/pkgmaint/findredundantdeps.1.pod>

=cut
