=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

pkgman-remove - remove installed packages

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<pkgman> remove [B<-v>|B<-vv>] [B<--test>] [B<--log>] [B<--deps>]
[B<--force>] [B<--group>] [B<--rargs>=I<PKGRM_ARGS>]
[B<--ignore>=I<PKGNAME,PKGNAME,...>]
[B<--remove-scripts>|[B<--pre-remove>][B<--post-remove>]]
I<PKGNAME>...

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Remove all installed packages in the listed order.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 8

=item B<-v>

Be more verbose.

=item B<-vv>

Log to stdout the removing process.

=item B<--test>

Dry run, do not actually remove anything.

=item B<--log>

Create a transaction log file.  It can be set globally for all
transactions (see C<writelog> in
L<pkgman.conf(5)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgman/pkgman.conf.5.pod>).

=item B<--deps>

Remove all packages in the listed order including their dependencies.

=item B<--force>

Skip removing of already removed package(s).  Just ignore the package
and remove next in the listed order.  At the end of installation
procedure, all skipped packages will be in the report.

=item B<--group>

Remove all packages in the listed order, but stop if removing of one
package fails.

=item B<--rargs>=I<PKGRM_ARGS>

Arguments to be passed to
L<pkgrm(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgutils/pkgrm.8.pod>.

=item B<--ignore>=I<PKGNAME,PKGNAME,...>

Do not remove those packages, even if they are listed as dependency.

=item B<--remove-scripts>

Execute pre-remove and post-remove script if they are there.

=item B<--pre-remove>

Execute pre-remove script if it is there.

=item B<--post-remove>

Execute post-remove scripts if it is there.

=back

=cut

# vim:sw=2:ts=2:sts=2:et:cc=72
# End of file.
