=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

pkgman.conf - configuration file for pkgman

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B</etc/pkgman.conf>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This file is read by
L<pkgman(1)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgman/pkgman.1.pod>.

=head1 CONFIGURATION

Every line can contain one configuration option.  The format of the
lines is C<key value>.

The valid keys are:

=over 8

=item B<pkgsrcdir> I<path>[:I<pkg1>,I<pkg2>,...]

The location where to look for the packages sources.  The order of the
C<pkgsrcdir> options is important as if a package is in multiple
directories,
L<pkgman(1)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgman/pkgman.1.pod>
will use the one found first (directories listed first have
precedence).

If you want to restrict the packages used from one C<pkgsrcdir>, you
can append a comma-separated list of packages to be used after the
path, using a colon C<:> character to separate the two components.

I<path> The directory.

I<pkg1,pkg2> The final directory in the path.

Example:

  pkgsrcdir /usr/src/zeppe-lin/core
  pkgsrcdir /usr/src/zeppe-lin/extra:mpv,ffmpeg

=item B<runscripts> (I<yes>|I<no>)

Run pre/post-install and pre/post-remove scripts.

Default: I<no>.

=item B<preferhigher> (I<yes>|I<no>)

If set to I<yes>,
L<pkgman(1)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgman/pkgman.1.pod>
will parse version strings and prefer the higher one, even if the one
found in the packages sources directories is lower.  Influences
C<diff>, C<sysup> operations.

Default: I<no>.

=item B<useregex> (I<yes>|I<no>)

If set to I<yes>,
L<pkgman(1)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgman/pkgman.1.pod>
will interpret C<expr> and C<filter> patterns in C<list>, C<printf>,
C<dsearch> and C<fsearch> operations as regular expression.

Default: I<no>.

=item B<readme> (I<verbose>|I<compat>|I<disabled>)

If the readme option is set to something different that I<disabled>,
L<pkgman(1)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgman/pkgman.1.pod>
will notify the user if installed package has a F<README> file.

=over 8

=item I<verbose>

Print separate information about README files.

=item I<compact>

Integrate in the result output.

=item I<disabled>

No information about README files.

=back

See
L<pkgman-readme(1)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgman/pkgman-readme.1.pod>
for information how to read those F<README> files.

Default: I<verbose>.

=item B<writelog> (I<enabled>|I<disabled>)

Write the log for install, update and remove operations.

Default: I<disabled>.

=item B<logmode> (I<append>|I<overwrite>)

Write log mode.

Default: I<overwrite>.

=item B<rmlog_on_success> (I<yes>|I<no>)

When set to I<yes>, log files of successful build will be removed.

=item B<logfile> I<format>

The string that contains a path to the log file, where all occurrences
of next characters will be replaced by corresponding items:

=begin man

.TS
left, box, line, tab (|) ;
l | l.
.SP
%n | package name
%p | package path
%v | package version
%r | package release
.TE

=end man

=begin text

            %n -> package name
            %p -> package path
            %v -> package version
            %r -> package release
            
=end text

=begin html

  <table>
    <tr><td>%n</td><td>package name</td><tr>
    <tr><td>%p</td><td>package path</td></tr>
    <tr><td>%v</td><td>package version</td></tr>
    <tr><td>%r</td><td>package release</td></tr>
  </table>

=end html

Example: C</var/log/pkgbuild/%n.log>

Default: none.

=item B<makecommand> I<command>

Use an alternate I<command> instead of
L<pkgmk(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgmk/pkgmk.8.pod>
for the command which is used to build the package.

Default: I<pkgmk>.

=item B<addcommand> I<command>

Use an alternate I<command> instead of
L<pkgadd(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgutils/pkgadd.8.pod>
for the command which is used to install the package.

Default: I<pkgadd>.

=item B<removecommand> I<command>

Use an alternate I<command> instead of
L<pkgrm(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgutils/pkgrm.8.pod>
for the command which is used to remove the package.

Default: I<pkgrm>.

=item B<runscriptcommand> I<command>

Use an alternate command instead of
L<sh(1)|https://www.mankier.com/1/dash> for the command which is
used to run the C<pre/post-install> and C<pre/post-remove> scripts.

Default: I</bin/sh>.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLE

  #
  # /etc/pkgman.conf: pkgman(1) configuration
  #

  # use local directory first
  #pkgsrcdir /path/to/unofficial/pkgsrcs/

  # zeppe-lin official
  pkgsrcdir /usr/src/zeppe-lin/core
  pkgsrcdir /usr/src/zeppe-lin/extra

  # log options
  writelog enabled
  logmode overwrite
  rmlog_on_success yes
  logfile /var/log/pkgbuild/%n.log

  # notify the user about README files
  readme verbose

  # do not prefer higher versions in sysup / diff
  preferhigher no

  # do not use regex search
  useregex no

  # run pre/post-install and pre/post-remove scripts
  runscripts yes

  # End of file.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<pkgman(1)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgman/pkgman.1.pod>

=cut

# vim:sw=2:ts=2:sts=2:et:cc=72
# End of file.
