=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

pkgman-(install|update) - (install|update) packages

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<pkgman> (install|update) [B<-v>|B<-vv>] [B<--test>] [B<--log>]
[B<--deps>] [B<--force>] [B<--group>]
[B<--margs>=I<PKGMK_ARGS>|I<PKGMK_ALIASES>]
[B<--aargs>=I<PKGADD_ARGS>|I<PKGADD_ALIASES>]
[B<--ignore>=I<PKGNAME,PKGNAME,...>]
[B<--install-scripts>|[B<--pre-install>][B<--post-install>]]
I<PKGNAME>...

=head1 DESCRIPTION

(Install|Update) all packages in the listed order.  It looks in all
packages sources directories specified in F</etc/pkgman.conf> as
C<pkgsrcdir> directories.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 8

=item B<-v>

Be more verbose.

=item B<-vv>

Log to stdout the (installation|updating) process.

=item B<--test>

Dry run, do not actually (install|update) anything.

=item B<--log>

Create a transaction log file.  It can be set globally for all
transactions (see C<writelog> in
L<pkgman.conf(5)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgman/pkgman.conf.5.pod>).

=item B<--deps>

(Install|Update) all packages in the listed order including their
dependencies.

=item B<--force>

Skip installation of already installed package(s).  Just ignore the
package and install next in the listed order.  At the end of
installation procedure, all skipped packages will be in the report.

=item B<--group>

(Install|Update) all packages in the listed order, but stop if
(installation|updating) of one package fails.  This can be used to
(install|update) packages where I<package2> depends on I<package1>.

=item B<--margs>=I<PKGMK_ARGS>

Arguments to be passed to
L<pkgmk(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgmk/pkgmk.8.pod>.

=item I<PKGMK_ALIASES>

=over

=item B<-fr>

Force build, implies "pkgmk -f" (same as B<--margs>=-f).

=item B<-um>

Update md5sum, implies "pkgmk -um" (same as B<--margs>=-um).

=item B<-im>

Ignore md5sum, implies "pkgmk -im" (same as B<--margs>=-im).

=item B<-uf>

Update footprint, implies "pkgmk -uf" (same as B<--margs>=-uf).

=item B<-if>

Ignore footprint, implies "pkgmk -if" (same as B<--margs>=-if).

=item B<-ns>

No stripping, implies "pkgmk -ns" (same as B<--margs>=-ns).

=item B<-kw>

Keep working directory, implies "pkgmk -kw" (same as B<--margs>=-kw).

=back

=item B<--aargs>=I<PKGADD_ARGS>

Arguments to be passed to
L<pkgadd(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgutils/pkgadd.8.pod>.

=item I<PKGADD_ALIASES>

=over

=item B<-f>, B<-i>

Force install, implies "pkgadd -f" (same as B<--aargs>=-f).

=back

=item B<--ignore>=I<PKGNAME,PKGNAME,...>

Do not install those packages, even if they are listed as dependency.

=item B<--install-scripts>

Execute pre-install and post-install script if they are there.

=item B<--pre-install>

Execute pre-install script if it is there.

=item B<--post-install>

Execute post-install scripts if it is there.

=back

=cut

# vim:sw=2:ts=2:sts=2:et:cc=72
# End of file.
