=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

revdep - check for missing libraries of installed packages

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<revdep> [I<OPTION>]... [I<PKGNAME>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<revdep> checks for missing libraries of installed packages using
elfutils' libelf and the same algorithm that
L<ld.so(8)|https://www.mankier.com/8/ld.so>
uses.

=head1 OPTIONS

Mandatory arguments to long options are mandatory for short options
too.

=over 8

=item B<-c>, B<--ldsoconf> I<PATH>

Specify an alternate location for F<ld.so.conf>.

Default location is F</etc/ld.so.conf>.

=item B<-d>, B<--pkgdb> I<PATH>

Specify an alternate location for the package database.

Default location is F</var/lib/pkg/db>.

=item B<-r>, B<--confd> I<PATH>

Specify an alternate location for B<revdep> package configuration.

Default location is F</etc/revdep.d>.

=item B<-i>, B<--ignore> I<PKGNAME>

Comma-separated list of packages to ignore.

=item B<-V>, B<--verbose>

Formatted listing.

=item B<-e>, B<--erroneous>

Include erroneous files in the output.

=item B<-p>, B<--precise>

Include precise file errors in the output.

=item B<-t>, B<--trace>

Show debug/trace.

=item B<-v>, B<--version>

Print version and exit.

=item B<-h>, B<--help>

Print help and exit.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLE

Try this command to list broken packages:

  revdep

Use this command to rebuild packages on your system:

  pkgman update -fr `revdep`

=head1 ADDITIONAL LIBRARY DIRECTORIES

Upon startup, B<revdep> searches the F</etc/revdep.d> directory for
files named after packages.  If any are found, any directories
(assumed to be absolute paths and delimited by newlines) within the
file are added to a list of package specific directories to search if
a library dependency is not found in one of the many standard
locations (as specified by
L<ld.so(8)|https://www.mankier.com/8/ld.so>).

If a package is discovered to have a library dependencies that are in
a non-standard directory F</usr/lib/firefox> then a file named
F<firefox> should be created under F</etc/revdep.d> with a single
line containing F</usr/lib/firefox>.  This will tell B<revdep> where
to find firefox's F<libxul.so> when looking for its library
dependencies, reducing one source of false positives.  Ideally, this
file would be included with the package's own packaging as well.

=head1 EXIT STATUS

=over 8

=item C<0>

There are no missing libraries found.  All is ok.

=item C<1>

Failed to parse command-line arguments.

=item C<2>

Failed to read package database.

=item C<3>

Failed to read ld conf.

=item C<4>

Found at least one missing library.

=back

=head1 NOTES

C++ rewrite inspired by Johannes Winkelmann's L<mailto:jw@tks6.net>
shell B<revdep>.

Contributed to design Danny Rawlins L<mailto:contact@romster.me>.

=head1 AUTHOR

James Buren, L<ryuo@freenode>

=cut

# vim:sw=2:ts=2:sts=2:et:cc=72
# End of file.
