=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

pkgadd - install software package

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<pkgadd> [I<OPTION>]... I<FILE>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<pkgadd> is a package management utility, which installs a software
package.  A package is an archive of files (.pkg.tar.gz, .pkg.tar.bz2
or .pkg.tar.xz).

=head1 OPTIONS

Mandatory arguments to long options are mandatory for short options
too.

=over 8

=item B<-u>, B<--upgrade>

Upgrade/replace package with the same name as I<FILE>.

=item B<-f>, B<--force>

Force installation, overwrite conflicting files.  If the package that
is about to be installed contains files that are already installed
this option will cause all those files to be overwritten.

I<This option should be used with care, preferably not at all>.

=item B<-r>, B<--root> I<PATH>

Specify alternate installation root (default is C</>).  This should
I<not> be used as a way to install software into e.g. F</usr/local>
instead of F</usr>.  Instead this should be used if you want to
install a package on a temporary mounted partition, which is "owned"
by another system.  By using this option you not only specify where
the software should be installed, but you also specify which package
database to use.

=item B<-v>, B<--version>

Print version and exit.

=item B<-h>, B<--help>

Print help and exit.

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION

B<pkgadd> is configured by the file F</etc/pkgadd.conf>.  This file
can contain rules, that are built out of three fragments: I<event>,
I<pattern> and I<action>.  The event describes in what kind of
situation this rule applies.  Currently there are two types of events:
B<UPGRADE> and B<INSTALL>.  B<UPGRADE> rules are applied when a
package is installed over an existing version, and B<INSTALL> rules
are applied in any case.  The pattern is a regular expression.  The
action applicable to both the B<UPGRADE> and B<INSTALL> event is
B<YES> and B<NO>.  More than one rule of the same event type is
allowed, in which case the first rule will have the lowest priority
and the last rule will have the highest priority.

Example:

  UPGRADE         ^etc/.*$                NO
  UPGRADE         ^var/log/.*$            NO
  UPGRADE         ^etc/X11/.*$            YES
  UPGRADE         ^etc/X11/XF86Config$    NO

The above example will cause B<pkgadd> to never upgrade anything in
F</etc/> or F</var/log/> (subdirectories included), except files in
F</etc/X11/> (subdirectories included), unless it is the file
F</etc/X11/XF86Config>.  The default rule is to upgrade/install
everything, rules in this file are exceptions to that rule.

(B<NOTE!> The I<pattern> should never contain an initial C</> since
you are referring to the files in the package, not the files on the
disk.)

If B<pkgadd> finds that a specific file should not be upgraded it will
install it under F</var/lib/pkg/rejected/>.  The user is then free to
examine/use/remove that file manually or use
L<rejmerge(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/rejmerge/rejmerge.8.pod>
to manage rejected files.

=head1 FILES

=over 8

=item F</etc/pkgadd.conf>

Configuration file for B<pkgadd>.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<pkgrm(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgutils/pkgrm.8.pod>,
L<pkginfo(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgutils/pkginfo.8.pod>

=cut

# vim:sw=2:ts=2:sts=2:et:cc=72
# End of file.
