=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

pkginfo - display software package information

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<pkginfo> [I<OPTION>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<pkginfo> is a package management utility, which displays information
about software packages that are installed on the system or that
reside in a particular directory.

=head1 OPTIONS

Mandatory arguments to long options are mandatory for short options
too.

=over 8

=item B<-i>, B<--installed>

List installed packages and their version.

=item B<-l>, B<--list> I<PKGNAME|FILE>

List files owned by the specified package or contained in file.

=item B<-o>, B<--owner> I<PATTERN>

List owner(s) of file(s) matching I<PATTERN>.

=item B<-f>, B<--footprint> I<FILE>

Print footprint for I<FILE>.  This feature is mainly used by
L<pkgmk(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgmk/pkgmk.8.pod>
for creating and comparing footprints.

=item B<-r>, B<--root> I<PATH>

Specify alternate installation root (default is C</>).  This should be
used if you want to display information about a package that is
installed on a temporary mounted partition, which is "owned" by
another system.  By using this option you specify which package
database to use.

=item B<-v>, B<--version>

Print version and exit.

=item B<-h>, B<--help>

Print help and exit.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<pkgadd(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgutils/pkgadd.8.pod>,
L<pkgrm(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgutils/pkgrm.8.pod>

=cut

# vim:sw=2:ts=2:sts=2:et:cc=72
# End of file.
