=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

rc.conf - system configuration file

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B</etc/rc.conf>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This manual page describes the format of the F</etc/rc.conf> file.
This file is a simple
L<sh(1)|https://www.mankier.com/1/dash>
script that defines font, timezone, hostname and services which are
used on system initialization and shutdown.

The file consists of a number of variable assignments of the form
C<variable=value>. Comments can be specified by putting a hash (C<#>)
symbol as the first character on the line.

The different configuration variables are:

=over 8

=item B<FONT>="I<STRING>"

Specifies which console font to load at system startup. The contents
of this variable will be passed as argument to
L<setfont(8)|https://www.mankier.com/8/setfont>.
The available fonts are located in F</usr/share/kbd/consolefonts/>.

Example: C<FONT=default>

=item B<KEYMAP>="I<STRING>"

Specifies which console keyboard map to load at system startup. The
contents of this variable will be passed as argument to
L<loadkeys(1)|https://www.mankier.com/1/loadkeys>.
The available keyboard maps are located in F</usr/share/kbd/keymaps/>.

Example: C<KEYMAP=default>

=item B<TIMEZONE>="I<STRING>"

Specifies the timezone used by the system. The available zone
description files are located in F</usr/share/zoneinfo/>.

Example: C<TIMEZONE=Europe/Stockholm>

=item B<HOSTNAME>="I<STRING>"

Specifies the hostname.

Example: C<HOSTNAME=pluto>

=item B<SYSLOG>="I<STRING>"

Specifies the system logging daemon to run at startup.

Example: C<SYSLOG=sysklogd>

=item B<SERVICES>="I<STRING>..."

Specifies which services to start at system startup. The services
specified in this string must be separated by space and have a matching
start/stop script in F</etc/rc.d/>. When entering multi-user mode the
specified scripts will be called in the specified order with the
argument C<start>. At system shutdown or when entering single-user
mode these scripts will be called in the reverse order with the
argument C<stop>.

Example: C<SERVICES='lo crond net sshd'>

=back

=head1 EXAMPLE

  #
  # /etc/rc.conf: system configuration
  #
  # See rc.conf(5) for more information.
  #

  FONT=default
  KEYMAP=us
  TIMEZONE=UTC
  HOSTNAME=host
  SYSLOG=sysklogd
  SERVICES='lo crond net'

  # End of file.

=head1 FILES

=over 8

=item F</etc/rc.conf>

System configuration file.

=back

=cut
