=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

pkgman-sysup - update all outdated packages

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<pkgman> sysup [B<-v>|B<-vv>] [B<--test>] [B<--log>] [B<--deps>]
[B<--depsort>] [B<--group>]
[B<--margs>=I<PKGMK_ARGS>|I<PKGMK_ALIASES>]
[B<--aargs>=I<PKGADD_ARGS>|I<PKGADD_ALIASES>]
[B<--ignore>=I<PKGNAME,PKGNAME,...>]
[B<--install-scripts>|[B<--pre-install>][B<--post-install>]]
I<PKGNAME>...

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Update all installed packages which are outdated.

Also see the
L<pkgman-lock(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgman/pkgman-lock.8.pod>
and
L<pkgman-unlock(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgman/pkgman-unlock.8.pod>
commands to keep the currently installed versions, even if there are
changes in the packages sources directories.

If you want to update only diffs which have a lower version installed
than the one in the packages sources directories, use the
B<--prefer-higher> option.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 8

=item B<-v>

Be more verbose.

=item B<-vv>

Log to stdout the installation/updating process.

=item B<--test>

Dry run, do not actually install/update anything.

=item B<--log>

Create a transaction log file.  It can be set globally for all
transactions (see C<writelog> in
L<pkgman.conf(5)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgman/pkgman.conf.5.pod>).

=item B<--deps>

Update all packages including their new dependencies.

=item B<--depsort>

Sort updating by dependencies.

=item B<--group>

Update all packages, but stop if updating of one package fails.

=item B<--margs>=I<PKGMK_ARGS>

Arguments to be passed to
L<pkgmk(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgutils/pkgmk.8.pod>.

=item I<PKGMK_ALIASES>

=over

=item B<-fr>

Force build, implies "pkgmk -f" (same as B<--margs>=-f).

=item B<-um>

Update md5sum, implies "pkgmk -um" (same as B<--margs>=-um).

=item B<-im>

Ignore md5sum, implies "pkgmk -im" (same as B<--margs>=-im).

=item B<-uf>

Update footprint, implies "pkgmk -uf" (same as B<--margs>=-uf).

=item B<-if>

Ignore footprint, implies "pkgmk -if" (same as B<--margs>=-if).

=item B<-ns>

No stripping, implies "pkgmk -ns" (same as B<--margs>=-ns).

=item B<-kw>

Keep working directory, implies "pkgmk -kw" (same as B<--margs>=-kw).

=back

=item B<--aargs>=I<PKGADD_ARGS>

Arguments to be passed to
L<pkgadd(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/pkgutils/pkgadd.8.pod>.

=item I<PKGADD_ALIASES>

=over

=item B<-f>, B<-i>

Force install, implies "pkgadd -f" (same as B<--aargs>=-f).

=back

=item B<--ignore>=I<PKGNAME,PKGNAME,...>

Do not install/update those packages, even if they are listed as
dependency.

=item B<--install-scripts>

Execute pre-install and post-install script if they are there.

=item B<--pre-install>

Execute pre-install script if it is there.

=item B<--post-install>

Execute post-install scripts if it is there.

=back

=cut

# vim:sw=2:ts=2:sts=2:et:cc=72
# End of file.
