=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

rejmerge.conf - configuration file for rejmerge

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B</etc/rejmerge.conf>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This manual page describes the format of the F<rejmerge.conf> file.
This file can be used to alter the way
L<rejmerge(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/rejmerge/rejmerge.8.pod>
displays file differences and performs file merges.  Changing the
default behaviour is done by re-defining the shell functions
I<rejmerge_diff>, I<rejmerge_merge> and shell variables I<EDITOR>,
I<PAGER>.

=head2 I<rejmerge_diff>

This function is executed once for each rejected file.  Arguments
I<$1> and I<$2> contains the path to a temporary file where this
function should write its result.  The contents of the temporary file
will later be presented to the user as the difference between the two
files.

=head2 I<rejmerge_merge>

This function is executed when the user chooses to merge two files.
Argument I<$1> and I<$2> contains the paths to the installed and
rejected files.  Argument I<$3> contains the path to a temporary file
where this function should write its result.  The contents of the
temporary file will later be presented to the user as the merge result.

This function also has the option to set the variable
I<REJMERGE_MERGE_INFO>.  The contents of this variable will be
displayed as informational text after a merge has been performed.  Its
purpose is to provide information about the merge, e.g.
"5 merge conflicts found".

=head2 I<EDITOR>

This variable defines the editor used in merge operation.

F</bin/vi> if unset.

=head2 I<PAGER>

This variable defines the pager used in C<diff> and C<merge> operations.

F</bin/more> if unset.

=head1 EXAMPLE

  #
  # /etc/rejmerge.conf: rejmerge(8) configuration
  #
  # See rejmerge.conf(5) manual page for more information.
  #

  # Use diff(1) to produce side-by-side output.
  rejmerge_diff() { diff -y $1 $2 > $3 ; }
  # or ...
  # Use diff(1) to produce unified and colorized output.
  rejmerge_diff() { diff -u --color=always $1 $2 > $3 ; }

  # Use sdiff(1) to merge instead of the default diff(1).
  rejmerge_merge() { sdiff -o $3 $1 $2 ; }

  # Use vim(1) as editor instead of the default vi(1).
  EDITOR="/usr/bin/vim"

  # Use less(1) as pager instead of the default more(1).
  # -R option is required if diffs above produces raw control chars.
  PAGER="/usr/bin/less -R"

  # End of file.

=head1 FILES

=over 8

=item F</etc/rejmerge.conf>

Configuration file for
L<rejmerge(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/rejmerge/rejmerge.8.pod>.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<rejmerge(8)|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/zeppe-lin/blob/master/core/rejmerge/rejmerge.8.pod>

=cut

# vim:sw=2:ts=2:sts=2:et:cc=72
# End of file.
